Wavelet Tree Module (#4813)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: content/6_Advanced/Wavelet.mdx

---
id: wavelet
title: 'Wavelet Tree'
author: Benjamin Qi, Omri Jerbi
prerequisites:
  - RURQ

> description: Wavelet trees are data structures that support efficient queries for the k-th minimum element in a range by maintaining a segment tree over values instead of indices"

Reviewer: keep the description brief, maybe like:

`Wavelet trees support efficient queries for the kth minimum element in a range`

	</Resource>
</Resources>

> Suppose you want to support the following queries:

Reviewer 2: why was this solution header deleted?

if you want to explain how a wavelet tree works before an explanatory problem, move it up

Author: The example problem is essentially a second type of query, but to explain it more clearly, I need first to describe the first type of query

Reviewer 2: you should make that clear from the start 👀 

also there should still be a solution header for the problem. you would probably move the first type of query and its explanation before this header.

Author: If I understood correctly, the structure should be as follows:

- First, we will discuss a different type of query to clarify the second.
= Explanation of the first type of query.
- Solution header followed by the explanation of the second type of query.

Reviewer 2: you don't have the solution header at the moment—if you think explaining the first query is necessary to understand the second query, i would suggest a structure like so:

* solution header
* before we solve this problem, let's consider a simpler ver. where ...
* explanation of first query
* bring it back to second query
* explain
* conclude the problem
* implementation

also if you could integrate some of the info blocks in the module that'd be great, right now they kind of interrupt the flow of the content. they generally should only appear once at the beginning or end of a section.

Author: The info blocks were once part of the text, but since it is not necessary to read them to understand, I have moved them to info blocks. However, I believe they could provide them for those who need to recap or didn't full understand what was said.
Also the structure was changed.

> - Given a range $l$, $r$ count the number of occurrences of value $x$.
> - Given a range $l$, $r$ find the $k$ smallest element

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Given a range, count the number of occurrences of value $x$.
- Given a range, find the $k$ smallest element
```

> With wavelet tree, you can easily support those queries in $log(M)$ time.
> when M is the maximum value in the array.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With a wavelet tree, you can easily support those queries in $\log(M)$ time,
where $M$ is the maximum value in the array.
```
please adhere and be consistent with latex usage

## Wavelet tree structure

A wavelet tree is a binary tree where each node represents a range of values.
The root node covers the entire range, and each subsequent level splits the
range into two halves.

> We are going to maintain a segment tree over values instead of indices. Each segment will contain indices whose values lie within the segment's range. We'll save those indices in a vector. Notice that an index can be in at most $log(M)$ segments

Reviewer 2: you can combine these two paragraphs since rurq is a prereq

also might be worth leading the reader to why we'd want to segtree over values instead of indices (why?), but it's your choice on how you want to explain it

Author: That's true, but it's a bit different. I want to emphasize that we are maintaining segments over values and explain what that means, so they won't confuse it with a standard segment tree.

as for your second comment I agree that could be useful information, I will try to add it.

<Spoiler title="Wavelet tree Visualization">

> Let's say our array is: $[3,5,3,1,2,2,3,4,5,5]$

Reviewer 2: why does your visualization not contain the same array as the example you give?

Reviewer 2: Oops, this is my bad. I misread the second level of nodes.

Regarding the visualization, this is very minor but $7$ should be in brackets instead of parentheses, just to be consistent.

> Each node has an array representing the indecies of every number between l and r

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each node has an array representing the indices of every number between l and r
```
spelling

![Wavelet Tree Visualization](./assets/diagram.png)
</Spoiler>

## Solving the first type of query

> **Given a range l, r count the number of occurrences of value x.**

Reviewer 2: be consistent with latex

To calculate the number of occurrences from $𝑙$ to $𝑟$, we can use the following
formula:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\texttt{occurrences}(l, r) = \texttt{occurrences}(r) - \texttt{occurrences}(l)
\end{aligned}
$$

This reduces the problem to counting the number of occurrences in a prefix.

One way to solve the problem is to go to the leaf node
and perform a binary search for the number of indices less than $𝑟$
However, let's explore a different approach that can also be extended to the
second type of query.

> **A different way to find the Index of $𝑟$ in the list of vertices**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Instead of binary searching on the leaf, we update $𝑟$ as we recurse down the
tree.
If we can determine the position (index) of $𝑟$ in the left and right
children of a node.
We can recurse down the tree and determine its position in the leaf node.

To find the position of $𝑟$ in a node's left and right children, we need to
determine how many indices are smaller than the middle value (mid) and precede
$𝑟$.
This can be done using a prefix sum.

Let's define:
- $c[i]$ = as 1 if $index[i]$ is smaller than mid otherwise 0
- $prefixB[i]$ as prefix sum of $c[i]$

Formally

$$
c[i] = index[i] < mid ? 1 : 0;
prefixB[i] = prefixB[i - 1] + c[i]

> $$

Reviewer 2: i would suggest getting rid of the formally part if you're just rewriting your statement in code

Author: I thought it might help people who don't fully understand what's written, or make it a bit easier to comprehend.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's define:
- $c[i]$ = as $1$ if $index[i]$ is smaller than mid otherwise $0$
- $prefixB[i]$ as prefix sum of $c[i]$

Formally

$$
c[i] = index[i] < mid ? 1 : 0;
prefixB[i] = prefixB[i - 1] + c[i]
$$
```

Hm, to me it feels a little redundant. If you want to keep it, it would be better in a code block instead of LaTeX.

  the left subtree. Therefore, we update our range and recurse into the left
  child
- If $\texttt{left\_occurrences}$ is less than $k$, it means the
  $k$-th smallest element is in the right subtree. We adjust k by subtracting
  $\texttt{left\_occurrences}$ from $k$, update our range, and recurse into the right child

<Info title="Notice">
  Notice we still update $l, r$ accordingly when we go left or right
</Info>

the answer then will be the value of the node we end up on (leaf)

## Implemention
**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(Q \cdot \log(M))$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>

using namespace std;

struct Segment {
	Segment *left = nullptr, *right = nullptr;
	int l, r, mid;
	bool children = false;
	vector<pair<int, int>> indices;  // Index, Value
	vector<int> prefixB;

	Segment(int l, int r, const vector<pair<int, int>> &indices)
	    : l(l), r(r), mid((r + l) / 2), indices(indices) {
		calculate_b();
	}

	// Sparse since values can go up to 1e9
	void update() {
		if (children) { return; }
		children = true;
		if (r - l > 1) {
			// Split the indices for left and right child

> 			vector<pair<int, int>> leftIndices, rightIndices;

Reviewer: btw, usaco guide code typically uses `snake_case` for variable names

			partition_copy(indices.begin(), indices.end(), leftIndices.begin(),
			               rightIndices.begin(), [this](const pair<int, int> &elem) {
				               return elem.second < mid;
			               });

			left = new Segment(l, mid, leftIndices);
			right = new Segment(mid, r, rightIndices);
		}
	}

	// Calculates the prefix B

> 	void calculate_b() {

Reviewer: why not put this in the constructor?

Author: The idea was to split the code into pieces to make it easier to understand, would you prefer it inside the constructor?

Reviewer: you could like put a comment inside the constructor saying ur calculating the prefix of b, then put the calculate_b code inside the constructor

Author: By splitting the code into functions, we reduce future code duplication and enhance maintainability, even if reuse isn't immediately necessary.

Reviewer 3: idk man i think this code would be just as readable/maintainable if you put this inside the constructor with a comment saying what it does

		int i = 1;
		int j = 0;
		prefixB.resize(indices.size() + 1);
		for (auto [ind, val] : indices) {
			if (val < mid) j++;
			prefixB[i++] = j;
		}
	}

	int find_k_smallest(int a, int b, int k) {
		update();
		if (r - l <= 1) { return l; }

		int lb = prefixB[a];
		int lr = prefixB[b];
		int inLeft = lr - lb;  // Amount of values in range (a,b) that are less the mid

		if (k <= inLeft) {
			return left->find_k_smallest(lb, lr, k);  // Appears in left
		} else {
			return right->find_k_smallest(a - lb, b - lr,
			                              k - inLeft);  // Appears in right
		}
	}
};

int main() {
	int n, q;
	cin >> n >> q;

	vector<pair<int, int>> indices;
	for (int i = 0; i < n; ++i) {
		int v;
		cin >> v;
		indices.emplace_back(i, v);
	}

> 	Segment seg(0, 1e9 + 2, indices);

Reviewer: just curious but why `1e9 + 2`

Author: The main reason is I am afraid of bouncing issues so I added a random number, technically +1 would have worked just as well.

Reviewer 2: could you define this as a constant? `MAX_VAL` or similar

Author: Ye that is probably best.

## Solving the first type of query
**Given a range $l$, $r$, count the number of occurrences of value x.**

To calculate the number of occurrences from $𝑙$ to $𝑟$, we can use the following
formula:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\texttt{occurrences}(l, r) = \texttt{occurrences}(r) - \texttt{occurrences}(l)
\end{aligned}
$$

This reduces the problem to counting the number of occurrences in a prefix.

One way to solve the problem is to go to the leaf node
and perform a binary search for the number of indices less than $𝑟$
However, let's explore a different approach that can also be extended to the
second type of query.

Instead of binary searching on the leaf, we update $𝑟$ as we recurse down the
tree.
If we can determine the position (index) of $r$ in the left and right children of a node, we can recurse down the tree and determine its position in the leaf node.

To find the position of $𝑟$ in a node's left and right children, we need to
determine how many indices are smaller than the middle value (mid) and precede
$𝑟$.
This can be done using a prefix sum.

Let's define:

> - $c[i]$ = as 1 if $index[i]$ is smaller than mid otherwise 0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- $c[i]$ = as $1$ if $index[i]$ is smaller than mid otherwise $0$
```

- $prefix_b[i]$ as prefix sum of $c[i]$

Formally

$$
c[i] = \begin{cases}

>     1, & \text{if } \text{index}[i] < \text{mid} \\

Reviewer 2: \texttt for variable names longer than 1 char

$$

To update $r$ as we recurse down, we do the following:
- To know the value of $r$ if we recurse left, we use prefix_b[r]
- If we recurse right, we use $r$ - prefix_b[r]

Now let's try to solve our main problem.
## Solving the second type of query
**Given a range $l$, $r$ find the k smallest element**

We will determine whether the answer for a given node is in the left or the
right segment.
We can calculate how many times the elements within the segments' ranges appear
in our range $(l, r)$ using our first type of query.
Note that this also works for non-leaf nodes using the following formula:

$$
\texttt{occurrences}(l, r) = r - l
$$
<Info title="Similar">
This is similar to counting how many times a value appears up to index $r$ in our previous query. We did this by using the new $r$ value at the leaf node. But now, we consider the difference between the updated $r$ and $l$
</Info>

Therefore, the occurrences of the left node is

$$
\texttt{left\_occurrences} = prefix_b[r] - prefix_b[l]
$$

<Info title="Left occurrences">
  Note that $\texttt{left\_occurrences}$ is the number of indices between l and r whose value is less than mid

> </Info>

Reviewer 2: This doesn't need to be an info block, you can just include it in the main content.

  the left subtree. Therefore, we update our range and recurse into the left
  child
- If $\texttt{left\_occurrences}$ is less than $k$, it means the
  $k$-th smallest element is in the right subtree. We adjust k by subtracting
  $\texttt{left\_occurrences}$ from $k$, update our range, and recurse into the right child

<Info title="Notice">
  Notice we still update $l, r$ accordingly when we go left or right
</Info>

the answer then will be the value of the node we end up on (leaf)

In conclusion we maintain our ranges l and r as we recurse down to our child, and when we reach the child node we can return $R$ - $L$.

## Implemention
**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(Q \cdot \log(M))$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>

using namespace std;
constexpr int MAX_VAL = 1e9 + 2;

struct Segment {
	Segment *left = nullptr, *right = nullptr;
	int l, r, mid;
	bool children = false;
	vector<pair<int, int>> indices;  // Index, Value
	vector<int> prefix_b;

	Segment(int l, int r, const vector<pair<int, int>> &indices)
	    : l(l), r(r), mid((r + l) / 2), indices(indices) {

> 		// Calcultes the prefix B

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		// Calculate the prefix B
```

			               });

			left = new Segment(l, mid, leftIndices);
			right = new Segment(mid, r, rightIndices);
		}
	}

	int find_k_smallest(int a, int b, int k) {
		update();
		if (r - l <= 1) { return l; }

		int lb = prefix_b[a];
		int lr = prefix_b[b];
		int inLeft = lr - lb;  // Amount of values in range (a,b) that are less the mid

		if (k <= inLeft) {
			return left->find_k_smallest(lb, lr, k);  // Appears in left
		} else {
			return right->find_k_smallest(a - lb, b - lr,
			                              k - inLeft);  // Appears in right
		}
	}
};

int main() {
	int n, q;
	cin >> n >> q;

	vector<pair<int, int>> indices;
	for (int i = 0; i < n; ++i) {
		int v;
		cin >> v;
		indices.emplace_back(i, v);
	}
	Segment seg(0, MAX_VAL, indices);

	for (int i = 0; i < q; ++i) {
		int a, b, k;
		cin >> a >> b >> k;
		k++;
		cout << seg.find_k_smallest(a, b, k) << " ";
	}
}
```
</CPPSection>
</LanguageSection>

## Supporting updates

Let's support updates of type:
	- change value at index $i$ to $y$

We can traverse down to the leaf to remove the old element and also traverse down to add the new element.

So what do the updates change?
 -
 Our indices vector
 Our prefix vector

> To change the indices vector, what we can do is, instead of storing a vector, use a set.
> Then erasing and adding values becomes easy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To support erasing/adding values to the indices vector quickly, we can choose to use a set instead of a vector.
```

On the other hand, to change the prefix vector, since each update could change our prefix vector a lot, we can't maintain just the normal vector. What we could do is use a sparse segment tree.
	- erasing and inserting can be done by just setting the value to 0 or 1 at the specific index
	- querying for a prefix can be done by querying the segment tree from 0 to $i$
This approach is not memory efficient and requires a segment tree's implementation.
A more friendly approach would be using an order statistics tree.

> Such that querying for a prefix would be equivalent to order_of_key($i$)

Reviewer 2: provide a snippet that shows how this would be implemented with order_of_key?

Author: Alright I have added it.

Reviewer 2: also probably clarify that ost is exclusive to c++

Author: Alright I briefly explained about it

	</Resource>
</Resources>

Suppose you want to support the following queries:

- Given a range, count the number of occurrences of value $x$.
- Given a range, find the $k$ smallest element

With a wavelet tree, you can easily support those queries in $\log(M)$ time,
where $M$ is the maximum value in the array.

## Wavelet tree structure

> A wavelet tree is a binary tree where each node represents a range of values.
> The root node covers the entire range, and each subsequent level splits the
> range into two halves.
> 
> We are going to maintain a segment tree over values instead of indices. Each segment will contain indices whose values lie within the segment's range. We'll save those indices in a vector. Notice that an index can be in at most $log(M)$ segments
> 
> 
> <Info title="Motivation">
>   The motivation for maintaining a segment tree over values lies in the types of queries we want to answer. While traditional segment trees handle range-based queries like sums effectively, they fall short for value-based queries. By maintaining segments over values, we can efficiently address these value-specific queries.
> </Info>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To answer value-based queries efficiently, we'll create a segment tree where each node represents a range of values, instead of indices. Just like a normal segment tree, each subsequent level splits the range into two halves. Note that an index can appear in at most $\log(M)$ nodes.
```

Author: The changes were made.

> <Info title="Motivation">
>   The motivation for maintaining a segment tree over values lies in the types of queries we want to answer. While traditional segment trees handle range-based queries like sums effectively, they fall short for value-based queries. By maintaining segments over values, we can efficiently address these value-specific queries.
> </Info>
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
not really needed?

Reviewer 2: i think it's good to briefly mention it, but it can be shortened down to one sentence in the main paragraph.

Author: Changed.

\end{aligned}
$$

This reduces the problem to counting the number of occurrences in a prefix.

One way to solve the problem is to go to the leaf node
and perform a binary search for the number of indices less than $𝑟$
However, let's explore a different approach that can also be extended to the
second type of query.

Instead of binary searching on the leaf, we update $𝑟$ as we recurse down the
tree.
If we can determine the position (index) of $𝑟$ in the left and right
children of a node.
We can recurse down the tree and determine its position in the leaf node.

To find the position of $𝑟$ in a node's left and right children, we need to
determine how many indices are smaller than the middle value (mid) and precede
$𝑟$.
This can be done using a prefix sum.

Let's define:
- $c[i]$ = as 1 if $index[i]$ is smaller than mid otherwise 0
- $prefixB[i]$ as prefix sum of $c[i]$

Formally

$$
c[i] = index[i] < mid ? 1 : 0;
prefixB[i] = prefixB[i - 1] + c[i]
$$

To update $r$ as we recurse down, we do the following:
- To know the value of $r$ if we recurse left, we use prefixB[r]
- If we recurse right, we use $r$ - prefixB[r]

## Solving the second type of query

> **Given a range $l$, $r$ find the k smallest element**

Reviewer 3: i mean the problem only asks for the second kind of query...

Author: I have already answered, in a different comment.

We will determine whether the answer for a given node is in the left or the
right segment.
We can calculate how many times the elements within the segments' ranges appear
in our range $(l, r)$ using our first type of query.
Note that this also works for non-leaf nodes using the following formula:

$$
\texttt{occurrences}(l, r) = r - l
$$
<Info title="Simular">

> This is similar to counting how many times a value appears up to index 𝑅 in our previous query. We did this by using the new 𝑅 value at the leaf node. But now, we consider the difference between the updated 𝑅 and 𝐿

Reviewer 2: please use proper latex

	</Resource>
</Resources>

## Wavelet Tree Structure

To answer value-based queries efficiently, we'll create a segment tree where each node represents a range of values, instead of indices. Just like a normal segment tree, each subsequent level splits the range into two halves. Note that an index can appear in at most $\log(M)$ nodes.

#### Wavelet Tree Visualization

Let's say our array is: $[3,5,3,1,2,2,3,4,5,5]$
Each node has an array representing the indices of every number between $l$ and $r$

> ![Wavelet Tree Visualization](./assets/wavelet_tree_diagram.png)

Reviewer: i couldn't find this image in the site repo nor as a file you added in. it doesn't show in the preview or in the deployment either. are you sure you added the diagram in?

Author: Yes, there was a slight problem with the image, its fixed now

### Solution - Range K-th Smallest
Before we solve this problem, let's consider a simpler version where we are asked, given a range, to count the number of occurrences of value $x$.

> ## Given a range $l$, $r$, count the number of occurrences of value x.

Reviewer: why is this ##

maybe consider making it normal size but bolding it, or smth like that

To calculate the number of occurrences from $𝑙$ to $𝑟$, we can use the following
formula:

$$
\begin{aligned}

> \texttt{occurrences}(l, r) = \texttt{occurrences}(r) - \texttt{occurrences}(l)

Author: No because I am doing including, excluding i.e [l, r)

\end{aligned}
$$
When $\texttt{occurrences}(y)$ is the number of occurences of x in the first y elements.
aka
$$

> \text{occurrences} = \sum_{i=1}^{y} \mathbb{1}(x_i = x)

Author: It wasnt clear before (I was asked about it), so I added it to make it a little more clear.

$$
\texttt{occurrences}(l, r) = r - l
$$
<Info title="Similar">
This is similar to counting how many times a value appears up to index $r$ in our previous query. We did this by using the new $r$ value at the leaf node. But now, we consider the difference between the updated $r$ and $l$
</Info>

Therefore, the occurrences of the left node are

$$
\texttt{left\_occurrences} = \texttt{prefix\_b}[r] - \texttt{prefix\_b}[l]
$$

Note that $\texttt{left\_occurrences}$ is the number of indices between $l$ and $r$ whose value is less than $\texttt{mid}$

- If $\texttt{left\_occurrences}$ is greater or equal to $k$, it means the $k$-th smallest element is in
  the left subtree. Therefore, we update our range and recurse into the left
  child
- If $\texttt{left\_occurrences}$ is less than $k$, it means the
  $k$-th smallest element is in the right subtree. We adjust k by subtracting
  $\texttt{left\_occurrences}$ from $k$, update our range, and recurse into the right child

<Info title="Notice">
  Notice we still update $l, r$ accordingly when we go left or right
</Info>

The answer then will be the value of the node we end up on (leaf).

> In conclusion we maintain our ranges l and r as we recurse down to our child, and when we reach the child node we can return $r$ - $l$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In conclusion we maintain our ranges $l$ and $r$ as we recurse down to our child, and when we reach the child node we can return $r - l$.
```

	</Resource>
</Resources>

> ### Wavelet Tree Structure

Author: No I did not. I forgot to edit it after deleting the section before it.

	</Resource>
</Resources>

## Introduction
Suppose you want to support the following queries:

- Given a range, count the number of occurrences of value $x$.
- Given a range, find the $k$ smallest element

With a wavelet tree, you can easily support these queries in $\mathcal{O}(\log M)$ time,

> where $M$ is the maximum value in the array.

Reviewer 3: ok so this aligns with the focus problem right
if so you can just delete this, we assume ppl read the problem beforehand

### Wavelet Tree Structure

To answer value-based queries efficiently, we'll create a segment tree where each node represents a range of values, instead of indices. Just like a normal segment tree, each subsequent level splits the range into two halves. Note that an index can appear in at most $\log(M)$ nodes.

> <Spoiler title="Wavelet Tree Visualization">

Reviewer 3: why's this spoilered

Author: I wanted to include a popup menu so users can choose whether they want to view the visualization or continue reading.

Author: Should I get rid of this?

Reviewer 3: the spoiler, yeah
the actual visualization, no

However, let's explore a different approach that can also be extended to the
second type of query.

Instead of binary searching on the leaf, we update $𝑟$ as we recurse down the
tree.
If we can determine the position (index) of $r$ in the left and right children of a node, we can recurse down the tree and determine its position in the leaf node.

To find the position of $𝑟$ in a node's left and right children, we need to
determine how many indices are smaller than the middle value (mid) and precede
$𝑟$.
This can be done using a prefix sum.

Let's define:
- $c[i]$ = as $1$ if $\texttt{index}$[$i$] is smaller than mid otherwise $0$
- $\texttt{prefix\_b}$[$i$] as prefix sum of $c[i]$

Formally

$$
c[i] = \begin{cases}
    1, & \texttt{if } \texttt{index}[i] < \texttt{mid} \\
    0, & \texttt{otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$
$$
\texttt{prefix\_b}[i] = \texttt{prefix\_b}[i - 1] + c[i]
$$

To update $r$ as we recurse down, we do the following:
- To know the value of $r$ if we recurse left, we use $\texttt{prefix\_b}$[$r$]
- If we recurse right, we use $r$ - $\texttt{prefix\_b}$[$r$]

Now let's try to solve our main problem.
## Solving the second type of query

> **Given a range $l$, $r$ find the k-th smallest element**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
also remove from "Solving the first type"

Author: "Where would they find information about the type of query we're trying to solve? Without the introduction, it would be quite difficult to locate. Wouldn't it be simpler to include a subtitle for that? Additionally, the first type of query is essential for solving the second type, but it isn't the focus of the problem, making it even harder to understand what we are trying to do.

Reviewer 3: then make it part of the header itself

Author: In brackets? or as the header?

</Info>

Therefore, the occurrences of the left node are

$$
\texttt{left\_occurrences} = \texttt{prefix\_b}[r] - \texttt{prefix\_b}[l]
$$

Note that $\texttt{left\_occurrences}$ is the number of indices between $l$ and $r$ whose value is less than $\texttt{mid}$

- If $\texttt{left\_occurrences}$ is greater or equal to $k$, it means the $k$-th smallest element is in
  the left subtree. Therefore, we update our range and recurse into the left
  child
- If $\texttt{left\_occurrences}$ is less than $k$, it means the
  $k$-th smallest element is in the right subtree. We adjust k by subtracting
  $\texttt{left\_occurrences}$ from $k$, update our range, and recurse into the right child

<Info title="Notice">
  Notice we still update $l, r$ accordingly when we go left or right
</Info>

The answer then will be the value of the node we end up on (leaf).

In conclusion we maintain our ranges l and r as we recurse down to our child, and when we reach the child node we can return $r$ - $l$.

## Implementation
**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(Q \cdot \log(M))$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>

using namespace std;

> constexpr int MAX_VAL = 1e9 + 2;

Reviewer 3: is this defined as part of the problem

struct Segment {
	Segment *left = nullptr, *right = nullptr;
	int l, r, mid;
	bool children = false;

> 	vector<pair<int, int>> indices;  // Index, Value

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	vector<pair<int, int>> indices;  // index, value
```

$$

This reduces the problem to counting the number of occurrences in a prefix.

One way to solve the problem is to go to the leaf node
and perform a binary search for the number of indices less than $𝑟$
However, let's explore a different approach that can also be extended to the
second type of query.

Instead of binary searching on the leaf, we update $𝑟$ as we recurse down the
tree.
If we can determine the position (index) of $r$ in the left and right children of a node, we can recurse down the tree and determine its position in the leaf node.

To find the position of $𝑟$ in a node's left and right children, we need to
determine how many indices are smaller than the middle value (mid) and precede
$𝑟$.
This can be done using a prefix sum.

Let's define:
- $c[i]$ = as $1$ if $index[i]$ is smaller than mid otherwise $0$
- $prefix_b[i]$ as prefix sum of $c[i]$

Formally

$$
c[i] = \begin{cases}
    1, & \texttt{if } \texttt{index}[i] < \texttt{mid} \\
    0, & \texttt{otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$
$$
\texttt{prefixB}[i] = \texttt{prefixB}[i - 1] + c[i]
$$

To update $r$ as we recurse down, we do the following:
- To know the value of $r$ if we recurse left, we use prefix_b[r]

> - If we recurse right, we use $r$ - prefix_b[r]

Reviewer 2: be consistent with usage of latex

			               rightIndices.begin(), [this](const pair<int, int> &elem) {
				               return elem.second < mid;
			               });

			left = new Segment(l, mid, leftIndices);
			right = new Segment(mid, r, rightIndices);
		}
	}

	int find_k_smallest(int a, int b, int k) {
		update();
		if (r - l <= 1) { return l; }

		int lb = prefix_b[a];
		int lr = prefix_b[b];
		int inLeft = lr - lb;  // Amount of values in range (a,b) that are less the mid

		if (k <= inLeft) {
			return left->find_k_smallest(lb, lr, k);  // Appears in left
		} else {
			return right->find_k_smallest(a - lb, b - lr,
			                              k - inLeft);  // Appears in right
		}
	}
};

int main() {
	int n, q;
	cin >> n >> q;

	vector<pair<int, int>> indices;
	for (int i = 0; i < n; ++i) {
		int v;
		cin >> v;
		indices.emplace_back(i, v);
	}
	Segment seg(0, MAX_VAL, indices);

	for (int i = 0; i < q; ++i) {
		int a, b, k;
		cin >> a >> b >> k;
		k++;
		cout << seg.find_k_smallest(a, b, k) << " ";
	}
}
```
</CPPSection>
</LanguageSection>

## Supporting updates

Let's support updates of type:
	- change value at index $i$ to $y$

> 

Reviewer 2: write this in one sentence

We can traverse down to the leaf to remove the old element and also traverse down to add the new element.

So what do the updates change?
 -
 Our indices vector
 Our prefix vector

> 

Reviewer 2: are you previewing this in usaco.guide/editor or another markdown editor?

if you're attempting a question->answer section, use <Spoiler>

Author: Use what?

To support erasing/adding values to the indices vector quickly, we can choose to use a set instead of a vector.

> On the other hand, to change the prefix vector, since each update could change our prefix vector a lot, we can't maintain just the normal vector. What we could do is use a sparse segment tree.

Reviewer 2: could you break up / reword this sentence? it's confusing to read at the moment

Author: Alright, I have changed it a bit; does that clarify it better?

	- erasing and inserting can be done by just setting the value to 0 or 1 at the specific index

> 	- querying for a prefix can be done by querying the segment tree from 0 to $i$

Reviewer 2: latex
